Add 357 release notes (#7966)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-357.md

> # Release 357 (XX May 2021)

Reviewer: Reminder

## General

* Add support for subquery expressions that return multiple columns. E.g., `SELECT x = (VALUES (1, 'a'))`. ({issue}`7773`, {issue}`7863`)

> * Allow aggregation pushdown when `COUNT(1)` is used with `GROUP BY`. ({issue}`7251`)

Reviewer: From end-user perspective, this should be documented for each connector that supports `count(*)` aggregation pushdown.

> * Add support for `CURRENT_CATALOG` and `CURRENT_SCHEMA`. ({issue}`7824`)

Reviewer: What do they return when current catalog or schema is not set?

Author: null

* Add {func}`format_number` function. ({issue}`1878`)

> * Cast `row` to `json` with field names, instead of `array`. This behavior can be restored 
>   with the `deprecated.legacy-row-to-json-cast` configuration option. ({issue}`3536`)

Reviewer 2: how about 
```suggestion
* Cast `ROW` to `JSON` such that it maps field names and values. The legacy behavior only returned an array of field values, and can be restored with the `deprecated.legacy-row-to-json-cast` configuration property. ({issue}`3536`)
```

Reviewer: or
```
* Change `row` to `json` cast to create JSON object, instead of a JSON array. [...]

* Print dynamic filters summary in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. ({issue}`7874)

> * Minor performance improvement for queries using `IN` predicate with short list of constants. ({issue}`7840`)

Reviewer: > `Minor performance improvement` --> `Improve performance` ?

if it is "minor" in a sense "user shouldn't care", let's drop the bullet

if user could care, let's maybe drop "minor", or replace it with some small number if we have it

cc @losipiuk

> * Reduce memory usage for queries with `WINDOW` clause. ({issue}`7947`)

Reviewer 3: This is applicable when query fails. Maybe it should be:
```
Reduce cumulative memory usage for queries with `WINDOW` clause that failed
```

> * Reduce memory usage for queries with `WINDOW` clause. ({issue}`7947`)

Author: Is this a memory leak? Once a query fails and gets removed from the system, all the memory referenced by it should free up naturally. Or is this just an accounting/stats issue?

> * Reduce memory usage for queries with `WINDOW` clause. ({issue}`7947`)

Reviewer 3: It's mem leak in a sense that driver context is not removed immediately when query fails. I didn't want to complicate RN though. We should fix the root cause too

> * Reduce memory usage for queries with `WINDOW` clause. ({issue}`7947`)

Author: How about:

> Release memory immediately when queries involving window functions fail

> * Fix incorrect handling of row expressions in `IN` predicate, quantified comparisons and scalar subqueries. ({issue}`7797`)

Reviewer: Maybe add "Previously ..." to explain what was incorrect, or indicate what users should look for in their queries to determine whether they should expect behavior change.

> * Fix failure when preparing a `GRANT` statement that contains quoted SQL keywords. ({issue}`7941`)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fix a failure when preparing a `GRANT` statement that contains quoted SQL keywords. ({issue}`7941`)
```

Author: The "a" is not necessary in this sentence.

## Security

> * Enforce materialized view creator security policies when view is fresh. ({issue}`7618`)

Reviewer: "when view is refreshed"? "when view is created"?
not sure what this means

cc @sopel39

Reviewer 5: Fresh means "not stale", i.e. that it's an accurate copy of the underlying data and is eligible to be used. I agree this wording is confusing, though this feature is not really end-user ready at this point, so I don't care enough to dig into this and try to better explain it.

## Web UI

> * Make the UI aware of principal-field (configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.principal-field`) when using `web-ui.authentication.type=ouath2`. ({issue}`7639`)

Reviewer 2: How about 
```
* Make the UI aware of principal-field (configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.principal-field`) when `web-ui.authentication.type` is set to `oauth2`. ({issue}`7526`)
```
also link issue instead of PR (I think we prefer that) cc @kokosing

## JDBC driver

> * Cancel Trino query execution when JDBC connection or statement is closed. ({issue}` 7819`)

Reviewer: it doesn't tell the full truth yet. For example, now statement is (correctly) closed when connection is closed. Previously, one could probably still use a statement after closing the connection.

```
* Cancel Trino query execution when JDBC statement is closed.
* Close statement when connection is closed.
```

cc @kokosing

Reviewer 5: That sounds more accurate

## BigQuery connector

> * Fix failures for queries accessing `information_schema.columns`. ({issue}`7830`)

Reviewer: Any queries? under specific circumstances? or was `information_schema.columns` totally broken for BQ before?

cc @hashhar

Reviewer 6: It failed if `case-insensitive-name-matching` was NOT enabled.

> * Fix query failure when containing a predicate on BigQuery `string` type with single quotes. ({issue}`7784`)

Reviewer: ```
* Fix query failure when a predicate on BigQuery `string` column contains a value with a single quote (`'`).
```
?

## ClickHouse connector

> * Improve performance of aggregation queries by computing aggregations within ClickHouse. Currently, the following aggregate functions are eligible for pushdown: count, min, max, sum and avg. ({issue}`7434`)

Reviewer: ```
`count`,  `min`, `max`, `sum` and `avg`
```

## Elasticsearch connector

> * Add support for epoch millis exposed as String. ({issue}`7838`)

Reviewer 2: nit: milliseconds?

> * Add support for epoch millis exposed as String. ({issue}`7838`)

Reviewer 4: ?
```suggestion
* Support decoding TIMESTAMP columns which used String with milliseconds since epoch as a value. ({issue}`7838`)
```

* Retry requests with backoff when Elasticsearch is overloaded. ({issue}`7423`)

## Kinesis connector

* Allow configuring refresh interval to get table descriptions from S3 via the `kinesis.table-description-refresh-interval` config property. ({issue}`1609`)

## MongoDB connector

* Redact the value of `mongodb.credentials` in the server log. ({issue}`7862`)
* Add support for dropping columns. ({issue}`7853`)

## MySQL connector

> * Added JSON based identifier mapping that can be set with `case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file`. ({issue}`7434`)

Reviewer 7: "Added" -> "Add"

> * Added JSON based identifier mapping that can be set with `case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file`. ({issue}`7434`)

Reviewer: Does this apply to Clickhouse above too? or Pinot, Oracle, MemSQL, Phoenix, Druid?
@kokosing

Reviewer 8: I might, but it is not tested there and I haven't test them all. There could be issues there. So this is why I haven't mentioned them.

Author: Ok, then we should list them. Even if they haven't been tested, the change still applies to them.

## Phoenix connector

> 

Author: Do it also apply to this connector? I included it only in the connectors indicated by @kokosing.

## Pinot connector
                                

> * Fix filter parsing for passthrough queries. ({issue}`7161`)

Reviewer 4: Any query with filter was broken? Or maybe we should be more specific here.

Author: @elonazoulay, do you have further details on this?

Reviewer 9: Simple filtersworked before (i.e. column name = constant), but more complex expressions had issues. This is the list of what was fixed:
* Function calls
      * CASE statements
      * IN and NOT IN clauses
      * Comparision expressions
      * Logical expressions
      * Casts
      * Double literals

If that's too much it's probably sufficient just to say filter expressions though.

Reviewer 9: This can be simplified to "Fix filter parsing for complex filter expressions in passthrough queries".

## PostgreSQL connector

* Added JSON based identifier mapping that can be set with `case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file`. ({issue}`7434`)

## SQL Server connector

* Added JSON based identifier mapping that can be set with `case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file`. ({issue}`7434`)

## SPI

> * Make `ConnectorMaterializedViewDefinition` non-serializable ({issue}`7762`)

Reviewer: add sth like "Connectors should implement their own serializable MV definition to allow ConnectorMaterializedViewDefinition SPI to evolve" (from cmt msg)

Author: I reworded slightly.

## Security

* Enforce materialized view creator security policies when view is fresh. ({issue}`7618`)
* Do not require configuring truststore for trusted by root CA certficates for Oauth2 or JWK authentication when secured internal communication is used. ({issue}`7936`)

## Web UI

* Make the UI aware of principal-field (configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.principal-field`) when 
  `web-ui.authentication.type` is set to `oauth2`. ({issue}`7526`)

## JDBC driver

* Cancel Trino query execution when JDBC connection or statement is closed. ({issue}` 7819`)
             
## CLI

* Add `clear` command to clear the screen. ({issue}`7632`)

## BigQuery connector

* Fix failures for queries accessing `information_schema.columns` when `case-insensitive-name-matching` is disabled. ({issue}`7830`)
* Fix query failure when a predicate on a BigQuery `string` column contains a value with a single quote (`'`). ({issue}`7784`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Improve performance of aggregation queries by computing aggregations within ClickHouse. Currently, the following aggregate functions 
  are eligible for pushdown: `count`,  `min`, `max`, `sum` and `avg`. ({issue}`7434`)

> * Map ClickHouse `UUID` columns as `UUID` type in Trino instead of `VARCHAR`. ({issue}`7097`)

Reviewer 5: Seems fine

* Allow aggregation pushdown when `COUNT(1)` is used with `GROUP BY`. ({issue}`7251`)
* Add support for `CURRENT_CATALOG` and `CURRENT_SCHEMA`. ({issue}`7824`)
* Add {func}`format_number` function. ({issue}`1878`)
* Change `row` to `json` cast to produce JSON objects instead of JSON arrays. This behavior can be restored 
  with the `deprecated.legacy-row-to-json-cast` configuration option. ({issue}`3536`)
* Print dynamic filters summary in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. ({issue}`7874`)
* Improve performance for queries using `IN` predicate with a short list of constants. ({issue}`7840`)
* Reduce memory usage for queries with `WINDOW` clause. ({issue}`7947`)
* Fix incorrect handling of row expressions in `IN` predicate, quantified comparisons and scalar subqueries. Previously,
  the queries would succeed where they should have failed with a type mismatch error. ({issue}`7797`)
* Fix failure when preparing a `GRANT` statement that contains quoted SQL keywords. ({issue}`7941`)

## Security

* Enforce materialized view creator security policies when view is fresh. ({issue}`7618`)

> * Do not require configuring truststore for trusted by root CA certficates for Oauth2 or JWK authentication when 

Reviewer 5: How about

> Use system truststore for OAuth2 and JWK for JWT authentication. Previously, the truststore configured for internal communication was used. This means that globally trusted certificates will work by default.

  `web-ui.authentication.type` is set to `oauth2`. ({issue}`7526`)

## JDBC driver

* Cancel Trino query execution when JDBC connection or statement is closed. ({issue}` 7819`)
             
## CLI

* Add `clear` command to clear the screen. ({issue}`7632`)

## BigQuery connector

* Fix failures for queries accessing `information_schema.columns` when `case-insensitive-name-matching` is disabled. ({issue}`7830`)
* Fix query failure when a predicate on a BigQuery `string` column contains a value with a single quote (`'`). ({issue}`7784`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Improve performance of aggregation queries by computing aggregations within ClickHouse. Currently, the following aggregate functions 
  are eligible for pushdown: `count`,  `min`, `max`, `sum` and `avg`. ({issue}`7434`)
* Map ClickHouse `UUID` columns as `UUID` type in Trino instead of `VARCHAR`. ({issue}`7097`)

## Elasticsearch connector

* Support decoding `timestamp` columns encoded as strings containing milliseconds since epoch values. ({issue}`7838`)
* Retry requests with backoff when Elasticsearch is overloaded. ({issue}`7423`)

## Kinesis connector

> * Allow configuring refresh interval to get table descriptions from S3 via the `kinesis.table-description-refresh-interval` config property. ({issue}`1609`)

Reviewer 5: How about "for fetching" instead of "to get"

Reviewer 5: The wording of this makes it sound like the "from S3 via the xxx" goes together. How about
```markdown
Add `kinesis.table-description-refresh-interval` configuration property to set the
refresh interval for fetching table descriptions from S3.

## Kudu connector

* Fix query failures for grouped execution on range partitioned tables. ({issue}`7738`)

## MongoDB connector

* Redact the value of `mongodb.credentials` in the server log. ({issue}`7862`)
* Add support for dropping columns. ({issue}`7853`)

## MySQL connector

> * Add JSON based identifier mapping that can be set with `case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file`. ({issue}`7841`)

Reviewer 5: "JSON based identifier mapping" sounds strange. Maybe say
```markdown
Add rule support for identifier mapping. The rules can be configured via the 
`case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file` configuration property.

Reviewer 5: This probably needs to go in a "Other connectors" since it seems to affect all JDBC based connectors including Phoenix, Redshift, MemSQL, Druid, etc.

## Pinot connector
                                
* Fix filter parsing for passthrough queries. ({issue}`7161`)

## PostgreSQL connector

> * Add JSON based identifier mapping that can be set with `case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file`. ({issue}`7841`)

Reviewer 5: See above

## SQL Server connector

> * Add JSON based identifier mapping that can be set with `case-insensitive-name-matching.config-file`. ({issue}`7841`)

Reviewer 5: See above
